                   Figure : The Roles Managers Play (Attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC-BY 4.0 license)

References:

14. Mintzberg, H. (1990). "The Manager's Job: Folklore and Fact." Harvard Business Review, March­April 1990, pp. 166­167.
15. Mintzberg, H. (1990). "The Manager's Job: Folklore and Fact." Harvard Business Review, March­April 1990, p. 167.
16. Mintzberg, H. (1990). "The Manager's Job: Folklore and Fact." Harvard Business Review, March­April 1990, p. 168.
17. McGregor, J. (2008). "Bezos: How Frugality Drives Innovation," BusinessWeek, April 28, 2008, pp. 64­66.
18. Stewart, R. (1967). Managers and Their Jobs. London: Macmillan.
19. Mintzberg, H. (1990). "The Manager's Job: Folklore and Fact." Harvard Business Review, March­April 1990.

This page titled 1.3: The Roles Managers Play is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

                                                                                  9 (1.3.4)
1.4: Major Characteristics of the Manager's Job

 Learning Objectives

     1. Understand the characteristics that effective managers display

Time is fragmented. Managers have acknowledged from antiquity that they never seem to have enough time to get all those
things done that need to be done. In the latter years of the twentieth century, however, a new phenomenon arose: demand for
time from those in leadership roles increased, while the number of hours in a day remained constant. Increased work hours
was one reaction to such demand, but managers quickly discovered that the day had just 24 hours and that working more of
them produced diminishing marginal returns. According to one researcher, "Managers are overburdened with obligations yet
cannot easily delegate their tasks. As a result, they are driven to overwork and forced to do many tasks superficially. Brevity,
fragmentation, and verbal communication characterize their work."20

Values compete and the various roles are in tension. Managers clearly cannot satisfy everyone. Employees want more time to do
their jobs; customers want products and services delivered quickly and at high quality levels. Supervisors want more money to
spend on equipment, training, and product development; shareholders want returns on investment maximized. A manager caught
in the middle cannot deliver to each of these people what each most wants; decisions are often based on the urgency of the need
and the proximity of the problem.

The job is overloaded. In recent years, many North American and global businesses were reorganized to make them more
efficient, nimble, and competitive. For the most part, this reorganization meant decentralizing many processes along with the
wholesale elimination of middle management layers. Many managers who survived such downsizing found that their number
of direct reports had doubled. Classical management theory suggests that seven is the maximum number of direct reports a
manager can reasonably handle. Today, high-speed information technology and remarkably efficient telecommunication systems
mean that many managers have as many as 20 or 30 people reporting to them directly.

Efficiency is a core skill. With less time than they need, with time fragmented into increasingly smaller units during the workday,
with the workplace following many managers out the door and even on vacation, and with many more responsibilities loaded onto
managers in downsized, flatter organizations, efficiency has become the core management skill of the twenty-first century.

What Varies in a Manager's Job?

The Emphasis The entrepreneur role is gaining importance. Managers must increasingly be aware of threats and opportunities
in their environment. Threats include technological breakthroughs on the part of competitors, obsolescence in a manager's
organization, and dramatically shortened product cycles. Opportunities might include product or service niches that are
underserved, out-of-cycle hiring opportunities, mergers, purchases, or upgrades in equipment, space, or other assets. Managers
who are carefully attuned to the marketplace and competitive environment will look for opportunities to gain an advantage.

So is the leader role gaining importance. Managers must be more sophisticated as strategists and mentors. A manager's job
involves much more than simple caretaking in a division of a large organization. Unless organizations are able to attract, train,
motivate, retain, and promote good people, they cannot possibly hope to gain advantage over the competition. Thus, as leaders,
managers must constantly act as mentors to those in the organization with promise and potential. When organizations lose a
highly capable worker, all else in their world will come to a halt until they can replace that worker. Even if they find someone ideally
suited and superbly qualified for a vacant position, they must still train, motivate, and inspire that new recruit, and live with the
knowledge that productivity levels will be lower for a while than they were with their previous employee.

Managerial Responsibilities

An important question often raised about managers is: What responsibilities do managers have in organizations? According
to our definition, managers are involved in planning, organizing, directing, and controlling. Managers have described their
responsibilities that can be aggregated into nine major types of activity. These include:

                                                                                 10 (1.4.1)
